---
title:  "Vernacular Regions"
date:   now
layout: default
categories: cultural landscapes
---

This post describes

Vernacular Culture Regions

Cultural Geography

Zelinsky (1980) draws on the work of Kroeber and Kluckhohn to describe culture as a complex set of learned behaviors that guide the thoughts and actions of humans. The distinguishing characteristics of culture are that it is specific to cultural and subcultural groups, unique to humans in both its intricacy and resilience, and transferred from person to person through symbols and behaviors, especially language. Zelinsky’s most succinct summary of culture is as “an image of the world, of oneself, and one’s community” (p. 70). From geographers, culture is a variable through which we can provide meaningful explanations for the spatial behaviors of groups and individuals (Zelinsky, 1980).

The scholarly study of culture, or even basic awareness of it, was at the time of Zelinsky’s writing a recent development, “[begun] only within the past few decades” (p. 70). Zelinsky describes culture as subject that is difficult to observe and describe because it is both complex and intangible. Furthermore, it requires a great deal of imaginative effort to recognize that the patterns of thought and behavior of one’s group are not fundamental truths and that, by thinking in objective, scientific terms, it is possible to make sense of “the seemingly chaotic kaleidoscope of beliefs and customs of alien societies” (p. 69).

In their overview of the state of cultural geography in the early 1990s, Price and Lewis (1993) echo Zelinsky’s nebulous description of culture by describing cultural geography as “the most ambiguous term in [geography’s] lexicon” (p. 1). This difficulty largely stems from how difficult it is to define culture, which according to them ranks among the three most complicated words in the English language. Uncertainty and disagreement over its precise meaning has led scholars of culture along avenues of inquiry that often seem to be in conflict. Price and Lewis name two schools of thought in cultural geography that reflect this apparent state of discord: 
1.	Traditional cultural geography, also known as the Berkeley school, defined as the study of how human communities relate to their natural environments, or the study of how natural landscapes become cultural landscapes. This approach is heavily empirical. Both Price and Lewis and Smith (2003) name Zelinsky as among the most notable members of this contingent.
2.	New cultural geography, defined as the interpretation of patterns of meaning in landscapes, and the study of how these patterns affect social relations “while contending with the spatial patterning of race, class, and gender in the modern urban context” (Price & Lewis, p. 1). Proponents of this approach, which emerged during the 1980s, advocate pushing aside the empiricism of the Berkeley School in favor of a more theoretical orientation.

According to Price and Lewis, although many scholars among the new cultural geographers see themselves as reformers at odds with their predecessors in the traditional school, in taking this view they are mistaken and missing the point; rather than renewing the subdiscipline of cultural geography, these scholars have created something completely novel and distinct. What the new cultural geographers risk in their efforts to shatter the status quo is that by so adamantly rejecting the work of the traditional cultural geographers, they may be ignoring something important and valuable merely because it is different. The scholarship of the Berkeley school might still deserve attention, even if it is not in line with how the new cultural geographers endeavor to define the subdiscipline.
This transition is something that I will call attention to in the second part of this essay. If the dearth of work on vernacular regions over the past twenty-five years can be trusted to indicate anything, it is that the study of this subject has mostly faded from academic consciousness in recent years. It seems likely that this neglect is a consequence of the tumult among cultural geographers and the resulting changes in the subdiscipline over the past two or three decades.
	
Vernacular Culture Regions	
I found a total of twenty-two pieces of research devoted to the study of vernacular regions, dating back to 1948. This corpus includes fifteen articles published in peer-reviewed journals (see Table 1.) Nine of these twenty-two works, including many of the earliest, could not be accessed, though in most cases basic information about their broader importance was available from some secondary sources.
The original intent of this study was to focus on the study of vernacular regions in the United States and Canada. As I reviewed the literature, it quickly became apparent that specifying this regional focus was both unnecessary and redundant. The body of work on this subject is small enough that a survey with no regional focus is manageable. Furthermore, I have not come across any scholarly work devoted to studying vernacular regions outside of North America. Of the twenty-two pieces of research that I found, nine focus on vernacular regions at the subnational level within either the United States and Canada or the United States alone. The remaining 13 studies focus on investigating vernacular regions at a more detailed level within in a specific state or region of the United States (see Table 1 for a more complete account of the areas covered by these studies).
Without exception, every piece of research on vernacular regions involves original empirical investigation. This investigation aims at either directly evaluating vernacular regions by conducting surveys, often of students, or indirectly measures vernacular regions by, for example, analyzing the use of regional terms in the names of businesses and organizations listed in telephone directories (see Table 1 for a complete list of the methods that have been used in studies). Zelinsky (1980) described two of the earliest studies on vernacular regions as the product of “prolonged immersion” and “personal observation” by their authors. (He was referring to Dunbar’s 1961 study, “Popular Regions of Virginia,” and Crisler’s 1948 study, “Missouri’s Little Dixie”.) Unfortunately, I was unable to study these efforts firsthand, though no study since published relies so thoroughly on first-hand experience. 
According to Tuan (2003), cultural geography before the 1960s was focused primarily on group behavior and values, with little attention reserved for individuals. Tuan points to the influence of David Lowenthal and his 1967 publication, Environmental Perceptions and Behaviors, in introducing to cultural geography a perceptual approach more grounded in psychology than previous work in the subdiscipline had been. The effect of Lowenthal’s work was to bring within the scope of cultural geography matters of individual taste, imagination, and behavior. Although Tuan argues that, “since the 1970s, [cultural geographers] have returned to studying group values or culture almost exclusively,” (p. 878) the enduring effect of Lowenthal’s work has been to introduce to cultural geography a more psychologically-grounded understanding of culture, with an emphasis on using culture to understand issues of identity and how they relate to sense of place. Because vernacular culture regions are rooted in understanding both issues of identity and of sense of place, this work seems particularly important to understanding how and why cultural geographers have chosen to study them. When Shortridge discusses the composite mental maps that he constructs from student surveys in his 1985 article, “The Vernacular Middle West,” for example, his work does a great deal to reveal a complex portrait of individual perceptions about place.
	It is not necessary to jump straight to the much later work of Shortridge to establish the link between Lowenthal’s work and the study of vernacular regions. Though their work never refers to vernacular or perceptual regions, Cox and Zannaras (1973) made one of the earliest attempts at bringing this concept within the scope of geographic research by introducing an idea from psychology - the “spatial schema” - to geography. The spatial schema is nothing more than a cognitive map or mental map; Cox and Zannaras define it as a system by which individuals organize their perceptions according generalizations about places. The spatial schema allows people to more easily and meaningfully connect their experiences to the external environment in which these events happen. 
Cox and Zannaras describe spatial schema as occurring on a range of scales; from the home, to the neighborhood, to the nation and beyond. It is toward this latter category that most studies of vernacular regions are concerned. (One notable exception is an upcoming poster presentation at the 2012 AAG Meeting, “Using GIS to Model Urban Neighborhoods as a Type of Vernacular Region.”) It is easy to imagine that the methods and concepts that cultural geographers have applied to the study of vernacular regions could be just as effectively be employed at different scales. For example, the ability to understand how resident perceptions, sense of place, and identity are connected with the city’s neighborhoods would be invaluable to an urban planner, especially if these perceptions differ with the city’s neighborhoods as understood by central authorities. Producing a map based on these perceptions might be helpful to businesses, schools, neighborhood organizations, and local governments. But despite the obvious applications, there is very little reference to this kind of study in the mass of research dealing with vernacular regions, and discovering whether urban geographers or planners have independently pursued these goals falls beyond the scope of what this paper will accomplish. 
Though the most important contribution of their work is to introduce the idea of the spatial schema to geographers, Cox and Zannara go further by demonstrating how this concept can be applied. They produce a map of national subregion “locational classes” within the United States based on a survey of students (see Figure 1) (Cox & Zannara, 1973, p. 8). This is the earliest map of vernacular regions in the United States that my research uncovered, and though crude compared to later work, the similarities between their map and Zelinsky’s 1980 map (Figure 2) are striking.
It is only with Terry G. Jordan’s 1978 article, “Perceptual Regions in Texas” that we are provided with what Zelinsky calls the “definitive definition” of the vernacular region (Zelinsky, 1980, p. 179). In his abstract, Jordan states:
Perceptual or vernacular regions are those perceived to exist by their inhabitants and other members of the population at large. They exist as part of popular or folk culture. Rather than being the intellectual creation of the professional geographer, the vernacular region is the product of the spatial perception of average people (p. 293).
Jordan cites two earlier publications (Brownell’s “The Cultural Midwest,” published in 1960, and Dunbar’s “Popular Regions of Virginia,” published in 1961) as having made important contributions to the study of vernacular regions. Despite their significance, Jordan describes these studies as having had “little impact” (p. 293), noting that the existing volume of work on vernacular regions prior to his writing was thin. Though Jordan was writing at a time when perception studies were becoming a popular topic among geographers as a result of the influence of behavioral psychology, few of them were making attempts to identify, delineate, and describe vernacular regions. 
Besides defining what a vernacular region is, Jordan’s work leads him to make several other notable observations (unfortunately, few of these observations have received enough further attention). Most important is the distinction that Jordan makes between environmental names and promotional names. Promotional names, according to Jordan, tend to be newer (only appearing after World War II), contrived by local groups hoping to promote an area, and emanate outward from urban nodes. Regions bearing these names are gaining territory, both geographically and in the public consciousness, at the expense of environmental names, which tend to be older, inspired by an area’s physical features, and spread outward from a particular rural area.
Reed – who is not even a geographer – was the first researcher to use city telephone directories as a source of data for the study of vernacular regions. Perhaps because his work predates Jordan’s 1978 definition, or perhaps because he is a sociologist rather than a geographer, Reed does not state his mission as defining the South as a vernacular region. Instead, he refers to the goal of his work as “mapping the South as a social-psychological entity” (Reed, 1976, p. 937). For his 1976 paper, “The Heart of Dixie,” Reed scanned telephone directories from a sample of U.S. cities, guided by the idea that where regional identification is strongest there will be more businesses and organizations with names based on regional terms. Without the aid of computer search software, Reed was forced to limit his sample of cities to a relatively small number, and he was only able to count entries beginning with regional terms. Despite these limitations, Reed’s efforts were successful, and the resulting map depicts a vernacular American South consistent with what most geographers familiar with the subject would expect and what later attempts would find (see Figure 3). (For comparison, see Wilbur Zelinsky’s 1980 map, Figure 4). Reed’s most important accomplishment was to pioneer and justify the use of telephone directories as a source of data for delineating vernacular regions, and several geographers have adopted his methods (e.g. Zelinsky, 1980 and Mann, 2010).
Another interesting point that Reed raises – and one that has been largely neglected since - has to do with the distinction between “folk” terms and “functional” or directional term s(Reed, p. 937). For example, the meaning of “Dixie” is fairly unambiguous, and its presence in the name of organization represents a clear link with a particular region and its culture, whereas a directional label like “South” or “Southern” can be used in a more descriptive sense, or in a way that does not carry as powerful an association with a specific set of values. Understanding the differences between how related folk terms and functional terms are applied is one of the goals that Reed has in mind when he suggests that his methods should be more widely applied.
Later in the 1980s, geographers began to focus on how vernacular regions change. Shortridge was probably the most active in pursuing this theme, most notably in his 1985 article, “The Vernacular Middle West,” and in his 1987 piece, “Changing Usage of Four American Regional Labels.” “The Vernacular Middle West” tackles a strangely ill-defined regional label about which several earlier researches had expressed curiosity (Reed, 1976; Jordan, 1978). What Shortridge discovered was surprising: Regional images are so powerful that when the original regional core changes in ways that make it inconsistent with that image, the regional core moves elsewhere. In the case of the Midwest, people associate the region with the pastoral, rural lifestyles, small towns, and agriculture. Consequently, when states like Ohio and Michigan industrialized, rather than changing their image of the Midwest to reflect that change, people simply stopped thinking of those areas as a part of the Midwest’s regional core. Instead, they looked westward for places that more closely reflected that image (see Figure 5). In his 1987 piece, Shortridge argues that regional labels are dynamic, and that in the United States, the vernacular East, perceived as urban and progressive, is expanding at the expense of the South and Middle West, two regions with agrarian, conservative, rural, small-town connotations (mostly because young people are less likely to identify with these labels).

Present Research Agenda & Personal Research Interest
A look at the number of scholarly works published by decade provides confirmation that the study of vernacular regions reached its peak around the year 1980, when Zelinsky published his article, “North America’s Vernacular Regions.” Two studies were completed during the ‘60s, six during the ‘70s, and eight during the ‘80s. Only a single study dealing with vernacular regions was published between 1987 and 2005; while several studies have been released over the past six years, only two of them appeared in peer-reviewed journals.
One of the goals of this paper was to discover what happened to this line of research after the late 1980s. What factors lie behind its apparent disappearance? With almost no exceptions, the twenty-two pieces of research in Table 1 are not being cited in scholarly work.  When contacted for his opinion, James Shortridge confirmed what I had suspected, replying, “I think it is a decline in interest.  This decline is mysterious to me, however, since such regions have both theoretical and practical importance.” (personal correspondence, December 13, 2011)
	I suspect that the decline can be attributed to a trend mentioned earlier in the introduction of this essay: the decline of the Berkeley School and the ascendance of the new cultural geography. As Price and Lewis note, cultural geography scholars who favor the newer approach tend toward more theoretical scholarship (1993). It is easy to imagine why these geographers would spurn the heavily empirical work associated with the study of vernacular culture regions.
At the same time, the advent of geographic information systems has enhanced geographers’ ability to access, manage, and interpret massive quantities of data from numerous sources. The kind of research involved in studying vernacular regions no longer must involve the tedium and inefficiency to which Zelinsky must have been subject as he mined telephone directories for data in 1980. Zelinsky admits that the biggest challenge involved in doing this research is dealing with the quantity of data; availability, however, is much less of a challenge. It is for this reason somewhat puzzling that work on vernacular regions seems so forgotten.
Perhaps the few articles released in recent years should be seen as signs of hope that cultural geographers are moving toward a renaissance of work on the subject of vernacular regions (see Table 1). Two posters to be presented at the 2011 AAG Conference list “vernacular region” as a keyword. One focuses on sports geography, and the other (as mentioned earlier) applies the concepts and methods developed in the study of vernacular regions to neighborhoods in Manhattan. I am sure that GIS will be an important component in both studies; all of the most recent pieces of work on vernacular regions are chiefly of note for their use of GIS (Mann, 2010; Mayfield & Morgan, 2005; Baker, 2005) and for their use of web-based resources (Mann, 2010; Lowry, 2008, Mayfield & Morgan, 2005; Baker, 2005).
The obvious ways in which GIS can facilitate future research on vernacular regions are part of what attracted me to their study. Even without conducting original surveys, vast quantities of data are available to be mined, and processing it into an interesting map of vernacular regions seems like a relatively easy task. Doing so naturally leads to a variety of questions to investigate further: Where is the region’s core? Where are its transition zones? Is the region expanding, shrinking, or moving?  Are there are notable anomalies on the map that seem to defy explanation? How do perceptions of the regions extent and character differ between those live within it and those who do not? The argument that Shortridge makes has great appeal to me:
The identification of people with subnational regional labels may seem a trivial concern to some observers, but such identity is a part, perhaps an important part, of one's sense of self. Popularly perceived places are the ones that matter most for anyone trying to discern general cultural or humanistic regions for planning, political, and other purposes. The dynamics of the four labels studied here, as well as others, deserve regular monitoring (1985, p. 335).
And as Shortridge would later comment on vernacular regions, “They are also purely fun!” (personal correspondence, December 13, 2011)



